# RF-localization
           
English        
          
The goal of this project is finding unknown position of the transmitter in space by analysing radio wave characteristics at receiver side. The aparature was consisted of one transmitter with emission frequency of 433MHz and 3-5 receiving antennas. Average values of voltage induced by the electromagnetic field of the transmitter were measured. Linear dependence of receiver power from voltage squared has been noted, which gave us possibility to use all the methods that analyse power characteristics. Measures were held on conducting metal table due to which, by the method of image charges, there was superposition of emitted waves from the original transmitter and its image. In this paper, 4 different methods were compared: Trilateration, Gradient Descent, Gauss-Newton method (GNA) and Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm. All methods except trilateration are optimization algorithms and their goal is to minimize the residual function, represented by a module of difference of measured voltage vectors. Analyzing results gained by simulation of the whole system the influence of conducted table has been determined, as well was the height of the antennas at which power losses were minimal. The average error for all algorithms in cases with 3, 4 and 5 antennas was analyzed. The error was found to decrease as the number of antennas increases. The average error using three antennas and LM algorithm was 15cm, while with 5 antennas 6cm. Comparing algorithms it is concluded that LM algorithm was the best, and that trilateration (error 8cm) produced better results than GNA or Gradient Descent method (11cm and 14cm, respectively).
         
Srpski       
         
Cilj rada je određivanje lokacije predajnika ispitivanjem karakteristika radio talasa koji stižu do prijemnika. Aparatura se sastoji od predajne antene emisione frekvencije 433 MHz i 3-5 prijemnih antena. Merene su srednje vrednosti napona indukovanih na antenama usled električnog polja predajnika. Uočena je linearna zavisnost snage prijemnika od kvadrata napona, čime su ova merenja mogla biti obrađivana svim metodama vezanim za snagu. Merenja su vršena na provodnom metalnom stolu usled čega je, prema teoremi likova, dolazilo do superpozicije talasa emitovanih od strane predajnika i njegovog lika sa druge strane stola. Upoređena su četiri metoda: trilateracija, metoda opadajućeg gradijenta, Gaus-Njutnova metoda (GNA) i Levenberg-Markvarov (LM) algoritam. Svi oni su, osim trilateracije, optimizacioni algoritmi, i cilj im je da minimizuju funkciju greške, predstavljenu kao modul razlike vektora izmerenih napona. Analizom rezultata simulacije sistema utvrđen je uticaj provodnog stola, kao i visina antena kada je opadanje snage u toku udaljavanja najmanje. Analizirana je prosečna greška u slučajevima sa 3, 4 i 5 antena. Utvrđeno je da se greška pri korišćenju svih algoritama smanjuje pri povećanju broja antena. Prosečna greška u slučaju tri antene i LM algoritma iznosila je 15 cm, a sa 5 antena 6 cm. Poređenjem algoritama zaključuje se da je LM algoritam najbolji, a da se trilateracijom (greška 8 cm) dobijaju bolji rezultati nego GNA ili opadajućim gradijentom (11 cm i 14 cm, respektivno).
        
